---
title: "ISO 9001 2015"
tags: 
- Quality Management
---
# ISO 9001 2015


> [!Overview]
> The following write-up is a summary of [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md), and is probably best to be read alongside the actual document. Many of the additional points have been sourced from *Essentials: ISO 9001:2015 for Everyday Operations* by Martin Hinsch. I have tried to expand upon some of the requirements in a civil engineering context, and aimed to highlight particular ways in which these requirements are satisfied by everyday engineering tasks or systems. This is an evolving document and many of the terms and additional links still need fleshing out.

## Summary

> ISO 9001 is an international [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md) (QMS) system. It presents fundamental management and quality assurance practises that can be applied by any organisation. It represents a foundation of planning, control and improvement. 

The latest revision of ISO 9001 strays away from simply listing a set of requirements, instead converting into a "risk-based standard", which allows flexibility and customisation to suit a number of different organisations. The standard describes itself as a "[Process Approach](notes/Process%20Approach.md)". Many of the requirements are within the context of your organisation. The term "appropriate" is used regularly, which in this context is defined as:

>1) according to customer requirements
>2) according to industry standards
>3) according to Good Workmanship
>4) the requirements for on-time and conforming performance of work


## Key Goals
The key goals of this documents are:

1) to create and maintain a sustainable competetiveness through an effective [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md), with efficient [processes](notes/Process%20Approach.md) and its constant evaluation.
2) to constantly and systematically plan, implement and evaluate improvements to the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md).
3) that the organisation is constantly dealing with it's own [non-conformance](notes/Non-Conformance.md), weak points and waste in order to [sustainably](notes/Sustainability%20MOC.md) eliminate the root causes.

## High-Level Structure
All management systems have a uniform [High-Level Structure](notes/High-Level%20Structure.md). This is in order to simplify the process for auditors and for companies which may stray across different systems.
Within [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md), the process-oriented approach requires the adoption of the [Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle (PDCA)](notes/Plan-Do-Check-Act%20Cycle%20(PDCA).md) to ensure customer satisfaction is at the forefront of an organisations' mind. This is a key consideration within Section [5. Leadership](#5.%20Leadership). A customer's basic needs include flexibility, short reaction times and low prices; something which can only be achieved through properly coordinated and efficient [Processes](notes/Process%20Approach.md).

## Risk
A key theme and important element of the [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md) [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md) is the approach to [Risk](notes/Risk.md). Risk is defined as a management task and should be anchored throughout the organisation. Management must ensure that a risk process is established and the risk concept is presented in all processes. A structured identification, evaluation and control of hazards is used in operational practice. Within [Civil Engineering](notes/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC.md), this may be found in the form of an [Inspection Test Plan (ITP)](notes/Inspection%20Test%20Plan%20(ITP).md) or a [Risk Assessment and Method Statement (RAMS)](notes/Risk%20Assessment%20and%20Method%20Statement%20(RAMS).md).

# Sections
The following breaks down the key considerations in each section of the [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md) standard.

## 3. Auditing and Certification
The [Certification Audit](notes/Certification%20Audit.md) is the decisive stage to allow a company or organisation to achieve [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md) certification. The auditor will study the processes put in place by the organisation and mark the ISO requirements as "completed" if they are satisfactory.
The key things being looked for are the adoption of a quality culture, as well as the in-house documentation and its use within organisational practice. An audit cycle can take up to three years to complete, and has a [number of different steps](notes/Certification%20Audit.md).
The findings can either be successful, or flag up significant or minor nonconformities, or recommendations and improvements.
A surveillance audit takes place twice in the three years following the initial certification.

## 4. Context of the organisation
### 4.1 Understanding the Organisation and its Context
For an effective [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md), it is required for management and employees to regularly ==reflect on one's own internal situation and the external environment==. This makes sure the system can be systematically tailored to the market and aids in setting [quality objectives](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#6.2%20Quality%20Objectives%20and%20Planning%20to%20Achieve%20Them) and long-term targets. The following should be analysed:

- adaptation of the product portfolio, expansion plans, innovations and technical developments
- effects of digitalisation
- the future staff requirements
- market orientation around competitors and customer demand
- legislative initiatives, activities of relevant bodies, chambers and associations

In an audit, it must become clear that management are aware of their strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and risks.

### 4.2 Understanding the Needs and Expectations of Interested Parties
Organisations need to be aware of not just *what* effects their business, but *who*. These influencing parties are known as ==stakeholders==. 
Companies in an audit would have to show the needs and requirements of the following stakeholders:

- main and end customers
- private customers
- employees and their families
- bank advisors
- local competitors
- main suppliers
- legislative boards
- indirect customers (users of a road network for example)
- existing transport boards and networks
- suppliers
- local and national politics
- asset owners
- citizens and their intiatives
- trade unions
- associations, NGOs and societies

### 4.3 Determining the Scope of the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md)
The [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md) certification is to be constrained with boundaries to apply to sectors of an organisation. ==Not every requirement is relevant to every organisation==. 

### 4.4 Quality Management Systems and its Processes
An ideal process flow is to be determined and presented in a [Process Map](notes/Process%20Map.md).

## 5. Leadership
### 5.1 Leadership and Commitment
The top management must ==implement, maintain, and continuously develop an effective QM system==. They are responsible, therefore, for carrying out the following activities:

- definition and communication of [quality policy](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#5.2%20Policy) and [quality objectives.](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#6.2%20Quality%20Objectives%20and%20Planning%20to%20Achieve%20Them)
- implementation of quality, [process approach](notes/Process%20Approach.md), [risk](notes/Risk.md) and customer orientation
- establishment of repetitively observable processes
- definition of roles, responsibilities and authorisations
	- this may be through accessible career progression and responsibilities overview
- provision of necessary [resources](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#7.1%20Resources)
- systematic surveillance according to the [Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle (PDCA)](notes/Plan-Do-Check-Act%20Cycle%20(PDCA).md) approach
- permanent and continuous improvement
- leadership and responsibility towards employees and support

The effectiveness of an organisation works both top-down and bottom-up. Management should set out processes and procedures to ensure quality is managed throughout the organisation.

Throughout every step of establishing the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md), the ==customer should always be prioritised==.

### 5.2 Policy
==The quality policy describes the organisational quality standards==. It should make clear how the management sees or wants its own organisation positioned in terms of quality.

The minimum requirements of every quality policy must include:

- compliance with applicable requirements
- ensuring continuous improvements of the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md)

The quality policy must be reviewed regularly (annually) and adjusted if needed. Any change process should go through a [change process](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#6.3%20Planning%20of%20Changes).

### 5.3 Organisational Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities
Responsibilites and authorisations must be defined and communicated, for example through charts, job descriptions and matrices. It can also be set out in the Quality Management Manual if one is present. ==Everyone has a responsibility for maintaining quality==.


## 6. Planning
### 6.1 Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities
Every organisation is obliged to deal with its own operational risks and opportunities.

> Risks must be consciously identified, evaluated, minimised and monitored.

### 6.2 Quality Objectives and Planning to Achieve Them
Quality objectives support the implementation of the quality policy at the operational level. 

==Quality objectives must not only be defined for the core processes, but also for important management and support processes, departments or functions==. Some suitable quality objectives might include:

- delivery dates
- complaints
- supplier performance
- reworking
- customer complaints

This may be a reason feedback calls are made following the issuing of designs - logging these comments and questions can lead to improvements later on.

### 6.3 Planning of Changes
In order to line up with continuous improvement, changes may have to be made for the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md) at times. The process for this will be:

1) changes to the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md) are to be assessed in type and scope
2) their influence on the organisation and the conformity of products and services is determined
3) measures/activities derived
4) responsibilities and authorisations identified and defined
5) changes are tested for effectiveness after implementation

All changes fall into the [Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle (PDCA)](notes/Plan-Do-Check-Act%20Cycle%20(PDCA).md).

## 7. Support
### 7.1 Resources
Management must ensure that the ==personnel, infrastructure and financial resources required to implement and maintain a QM system in accordance with [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md)==. The wording of this is remarkably similar to many of the conditions in the [Construction Design and Management Regulations (CDM) (2015)](notes/Construction%20Design%20and%20Management%20Regulations%20(CDM)%20(2015).md). The requirements are composed of:

**Personnel**
1) competence (quality)
2) availability (quantity)

**Infrastructure**
1) appropriateness to scope and extent of processes for the following areas:
	1) offices, workshops, workplaces, storage areas, welfare, energy and water supply
	2) machines, equipment, instruments and tools
	3) transport systems for inbound and outbound deliveries
	4) communication systems and IT structures

**Environment**
1) appropriate temperature, humidity and ventilation
2) as little dust and air pollution as possible
3) adequate lighting
4) minimum noise level
5) workplace-specific precautions for product preservation, health , safety and environment
6) order and cleanliness
7) avoidance of tiredness and exhaustion
8) suitable working conditions, with minimisation of pressure and stress.

Each of these, as per the [Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle (PDCA)](notes/Plan-Do-Check-Act%20Cycle%20(PDCA).md) should be monitored. 

**Organisational Knowledge**
==Knowledge of the existing organisation and required knowledge is an indispensable factor for long-term business success.== Every organisation should ask the following question:

- What knowledge is required for hte provision of products and services or in the processes? What is the organisational edge in knowledge over competitors?
- Where does the knowledge come from and how can it be updated?
- What are the soruces for updating knowledge, how is new knowledge rolled out in the organisation and integrated into the products or services?
- How is knowledge lost and how can it be protected?

With an engineering organisation, think about the regular business reviews, whereby information is shared among the team. Also, access to the [Business Management System (BMS)](notes/Business%20Management%20System%20(BMS).md) satisfies many of these requirements.

### 7.2 Competence
==Only employees with appropriate training can ensure that operational processes are stable over a long period of time and at the same time, continuously improve.== This can be achieved through on-the-job training, subject-specific initial and recurrent training and instruction are most suitable for this purpose. 

Think about regular performance reviews, or PDRs. This is the way organisations can understand the gaps in knowledge within the organisation and achieve the requirements of [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md).

### 7.3 Awareness
The standard requires an awareness of the employees for their range of tasks and the importance of a [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md). Personnel should be aware of their own actions and their effects. They should be familiar with the characteristics of:

- customer orientation
- process orientation
- risk-orientated action

An audit can ask employees whether they understand the main quality policy and the main objectives.

### 7.4 Communication
Management must ensure appropriate communication within it's own organisation and external parties, through meetings, emails, exchange of information via the intranet, telephone, company newspapers, information sheets or notices. 

Within an engineering organisation, they may sometimes have an internal magazine - for example, think about the Evolve magazine from Galliford Try.

### 7.5 Documented Information
==An essential characteristic of [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md)s is comprehensive documentation.== This documentation can be formed of:

- operational quality management documentation (manuals, process descriptions, work instructions, written procedures, templates, checklists, job descriptions)
	- think about how this is incorporated within a [Business Management System (BMS)](notes/Business%20Management%20System%20(BMS).md) within engineering organisations
- (internal) technical documents, production instructions, ingredients, lists, schematics etc.
	- standard solutions or equivalent can help with this point
- external documentation (customer specifications, customers operating or maintenance instructions, manuals, drawings, standards)
	- having a shared space for storage of this within a team is appropriate
- records (certificates, minutes, release documents)

> The standard distinguishes between:
>
>- **documents** - specification documents which ==define the way something is to be performed==. For the [Professional Review](notes/Professional%20Review%20MOC.md), these may be referred to as [Quality Assurance](notes/Quality%20Assurance.md) documents.
>- **records** - verification documents which ==indicate how, when, by whom and under what conditions activities were carried out==. For the [Professional Review](notes/Professional%20Review%20MOC.md), these may be referred to as [Quality Control](notes/Quality%20Control.md) documents.

As is evident in the Galliford Try [Business Management System (BMS)](notes/Business%20Management%20System%20(BMS).md), documents within an organisation must:

- have adequate identification (a suitable naming convention)
- the format should be properly checked and approved by an authorised person
- be present and available adjacent to the workplace
- newly approved documents shall be made known and distributed within the workplace. ==The only documents to be used are the most up-to-date
- documents should be adequately protected and remain readable. Ensure there are provisions against IT data loss
- documents should be archived over a defined retention period
- the storage and organisation of documents should be structures for easy retrieval
- this all applies to external documentation from customers and suppliers as well

As a designer, this is ==where the document register comes in==.

## 8. Operation
### 8.1 Operation Planning and Control
Operation is probably the one section through which site engineers will become exposed to [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md). It details the process of operational planning and control, and highlights a number of processes that, when extracted and compared to actions on site, can be extrapolated to commonplace, routine documentation such as [Inspection Test Plan (ITP)](notes/Inspection%20Test%20Plan%20(ITP).md)s and [Non-Conformance Reports](notes/Non-Conformance.md).
There are also sections which mirror the [Construction Design and Management Regulations (CDM) (2015)](notes/Construction%20Design%20and%20Management%20Regulations%20(CDM)%20(2015).md), particularly when ensuring there are suitable resources, staff capacity and expertise to carry out the product or service.

The general process and systematic approach to ensuring suitable planning and control in adherance to the standard is:

- Testing & inspections
- Resources
- Control
- Documented information

Or simply, ==planning, monitoring, testing, documentation==.

These are expanded upon in the subsequent sections.

### 8.2 Requirements for Products and Services
Sufficient communications structures with the customer must be established. Identifying and implementing the customer's needs is an essential factor in achieving customer satisfaction. If we think about this in terms of site work, regular progress meetings and systems to share and review documentation is vital to ensure communication of changes and developments is maintained at all points. This could be in the form of a [Technical Query (TQ)](notes/Technical%20Query%20(TQ).md), where a proposal or question is sent to the client's relevant team, and the client is informed.

The scope of works along with the required quality or specification must be provided to the organisation for them to submit a quotation. In engineering, we can think about this in regard to [tender documentation](notes/Tendering.md) tender documentation, whereby a potential client will provide suitable information for a [Bill of Quantities](Option%20B%20Bill%20of%20Quantities) to be developed. Alternatively, throughout the early development of a project, multiple contract specifications often aligning with the [Manual of Contract Documents for Highway Works (MCHW)](notes/Manual%20of%20Contract%20Documents%20for%20Highway%20Works%20(MCHW).md) will set out the required finishes, quality and controls required.

If anything deviates or changes from this scope of works, they must find their way immediately into the documentation for order initiation - for example, in the form of an approved [Site Instruction](notes/Site%20Instruction.md).

### 8.3 Design and Development of Products and Services
Organisations that include design activities in their range of services must carry them out under controlled conditions and therefore establish and apply an internal design process. Think about within [Temporary Works Design](notes/Temporary%20Works%20MOC.md), the initial design review, checking and approval process is important to maintain adherence with this. From a company wide angle, their requirement is to have this process accessible and available; in civil engineering, this is usually in the form of a [Business Management System (BMS)](notes/Business%20Management%20System%20(BMS).md) and the numerous flowcharts within.

==The development of the design solution as a whole and individual design phases must be formulated and tackled relevant to the scope, task and objective.== This minimises the distractions and ensures the quality focus remains on task.

>The starting point of a design typically start with documented specifications and oral information. Think about this in [Temporary Works Design](notes/Temporary%20Works%20MOC.md); the design brief, and associated requirements for performance, time, quality, cost, delivery and environment are given.

Any design outputs must be complete, comprehensible and understandable, as well as consistently defined. ==Standard solutions, company wide title blocks and keys can contribute to this.== Any problems and risks must have a system of recording, ready for the next review; this can be captured in the form of a comments sheet, or even drawing markups and emails. If any maintenance is required, instructions must form part of the output.

Design outputs must also go through a verification or testing process; this can be in the form of documentation checks, calculations and analyses. This is carried out in [Temporary Works Design](notes/Temporary%20Works%20MOC.md) through [checking categories](notes/Design%20Check%20Categories.md). Some form of documentation must be produced to validate this, in the form of test reports or calculation cover sheets.

Design outputs must provide some information on processes used, procedures, instructions for action as well as installation instructions. If a revision is required, the design change process must be as follows:

- initiation and assignment
- evaluation
- approval or release of planned change
- implementation, monitoring and documentation

### 8.4 Control of Externally Provided Processes, Products and Services
In almost any engineering task, an organisation will have to use or rely on another organisation in order to provide the prescribed service. The requirements of the external supplier must be defined, checked and monitored, in the following categories:

- product features and service
- price and delivery conditions
- flexibility and delivery times
- the general quality capability of the supplier

Some of the above can be hard to determine or define with a new company, which is where their past-record or evidence/case studies comes into play. Before awarding a contract, the qualification must usually be checked by means of supplier questionnaires, offer quality, test deliveries or supplier audits. The supplier can be continuously evaluated, with suitable KPIs being quality of incoming goods or services, complaints or delivery punctuality.

There must be sufficient confidence that the goods or services are of good enough quality for the client to take full responsibility for them. In an engineering example, this will be that the concrete supplier can produce quality concrete for them to carry out the goods, taking responsibility for the use of it to the customer. To ensure this, the output of the supplier must be monitored and controlled: this can be in the form of:

- random acceptance/final inspections (can be laid out in the form of an [Inspection Test Plan (ITP)](notes/Inspection%20Test%20Plan%20(ITP).md)).
- detailed acceptance tests (concrete cube tests, pull out tests)

Additional order requirements between a customer and a supplier can include:

- to have further subcontracting approved by the organisation
- to impose the same quality requirements on the [subcontractor](notes/Sub-Contractor.md)
- to inform about changes to sources of supply or the obligation to have them released by the organisation
- to notify changes to the delivered product or service
- to maintain a QM system certified to [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md).

### 8.5 Production and Service provision
The provision of services must be planned, structured, controlled and documented. The provision for this follows the same general process as in [8.1 Operation Planning and Control](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#8.1%20Operation%20Planning%20and%20Control) - ==planning, monitoring, testing, documentation==.

There are additional provisions: think about this in the context of a kerb delivery:

- **Labelling** - organisations must be able to ensure identification of their product or service, for example CE certification or a batching receipt.
- **Traceability** - not actually required from cradle-to-grave, but from purchase to delivery. This can be in the form of a serial number or batch receipt.

If you are hiring a piece of equipment, a level of condition survey or completeness inspection should take place. There can be post-delivery activities by the customer if the product does not achieve contract requirements, expectations or legal requirements. A change to this should be completed in a similar way to [8.3 Design and Development of Products and Services](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#8.3%20Design%20and%20Development%20of%20Products%20and%20Services).

With regards to handling and transport, a sense of mise-en-place should be present; that is, everything in it's place, ordered and clean.

### 8.6 Release of Products or Services
This is a key section for engineers as it basically sets out the requirements for inspections, controls and a method for release back to the client. This is where the requirement for an [Inspection Test Plan (ITP)](notes/Inspection%20Test%20Plan%20(ITP).md) comes from.

A structured inspection and release procedure, with hold points to account for defined test requirements and acceptance criteria must exist and be executed ==by authorised and qualified personnel==. 

The following has to be defined:

1) acceptance or rejection criteria
2) at which point or at which process step tests shall be performed
3) requirements for the recording of test results
4) specifications regarding the measuring the test equipment to be used, and if applicable, instructions on how to use it.

This is basically ==exactly the same headings as an [Inspection Test Plan (ITP)](notes/Inspection%20Test%20Plan%20(ITP).md)==.

### 8.7 Control of Nonconforming Outputs
Defects and damage must be troubleshooted through replacement or corrective measures. This must be ==identified and separated== from adjacent work activities if possible. The following are potential routes for remediation:

- use as is
- reclassification (due to restricted use)
- correction or rework
- return to the supplier
- scrapping/destruction

As with [8.6 Release of Products or Services](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#8.6%20Release%20of%20Products%20or%20Services), these are pretty much the ==exact sections present on a [Non-Conformance Report](notes/Non-Conformance.md)==. If any rework is required, this must be reinspected and verified prior to handover.

## 9. Performance evaluation
The performance evaluation phase, when thinking about the [Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle (PDCA)](notes/Plan-Do-Check-Act%20Cycle%20(PDCA).md) cycle, is the  "Check" part. The type, scope and frequency of monitoring and measurement must be defined and aligned with the size of the organisation. When within a design office setting, this may come in the form of peer audits.
In other settings, certain [Key Performance Indicator (KPI)](notes/Key%20Performance%20Indicator%20(KPI).md)s might influence the type of monitoring. These could include:

- Machine downtime
- Waste, rejections, reworking
- Time spent on an activity
- Complaint rate, cost of non-quality
- Delivery time
- Staff turnover rate
- IT downtime

As with the whole theme of [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md), ==the customer should be at the centre of any monitoring==. Surveying customers for example can be an indicator of performace.

To be compliant with the standard, the following data must be evaluated:

1) Product and services: e.g product testing, claims, rejection rates, requests
2) Customer satisfaction: e.g sales figures, type and number of corrective actions and customer complains, surveys and feedback.
3) Performance of the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md): e.g speed of implementation of audit findings, cost of non-quality
	1) This is important for the "top management" to review as well in a management review; upon which the entire management system is reviewed, including it's [10. Improvement](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#10.%20Improvement) measures.
4) Planning quality: compliance with schedules/deadlines or utilisation of resources: plan to actual hours, on-time delivery.
	1) Within construction companies, one important metric is time to pay subcontractors - this would be an example of a [Key Performance Indicator (KPI)](notes/Key%20Performance%20Indicator%20(KPI).md).
5) Risks and opportunities: e.g expected deviations in hours/days, rework, downtime, order extensions.
6) Supplier performance: e.g on-time delivery, incoming goods findings, costs and innovation capability.
7) Need for Improvements: e.g past developments to the examples given here.

The idea of recording and monitoring all this is to ==establish compliance with the standard, or at least show the starting point for improvement measures==.

## 10. Improvement
In the [Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle (PDCA)](notes/Plan-Do-Check-Act%20Cycle%20(PDCA).md), this is the "Act" section. It takes the lessons learnt and metrics obtained from the [9. Performance evaluation](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md#9.%20Performance%20evaluation) and produces ==strategic improvements== in order to improve the organisation. This may come in the form of:

- reorganisation
- investment in staff, or qualification
- measures in the field of IT/infrastructure and tools
- adjustments to production process
- instruction for a new training measure
- the decision to purchase new equipment or software

The continuous improvement can be issued formally or verbally, as long as there is evidence shown it has taken place. The basis should be small steps lead to bigger changes, almost like the [Kaizen](notes/Kaizen%20-%20Sarah%20Harvey%20(2020).md) approach.

#### Non-Conformity and Corrective Action
Identifying and rectifying non-conformity is a vital process within engineering and the running of an organisation. Often, however, the action of remediating a non-conformity (on site, through the process of a [Non-Conformance Report (NCR)](notes/Non-Conformance%20Report%20(NCR).md) can outweigh and leave behind the deeper rooted issues.

The process, therefore of dealing with [Non-Conformance](notes/Non-Conformance.md), is to:

1) identify the error
2) contain the damage
3) analyse the cause
4) remedy the situation
5) prevent reoccurance

Corrective measures, following identification and analysis, can include:

- changes of processes, procedures and [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md)-documentation
- adjustment of the [Quality Management System](notes/Quality%20Management%20System.md)
- improvement of training content
- changes to material specification
- design changes
- change of suppliers

As per the monitoring cycle, any changes made must be checked for their effectiveness, paying attention to potential risks and opportunities.

