---
title: "1. Understanding and Practical Application of Engineering"
tags: 
- attribute
---
*Taken from [The Civil Engineering Exam](https://thecivilengineeringexam.com/example-ice-written-exercise-submission/)*
# 1. Understanding and Practical Application of Engineering
👉 Next: [2. Management and Leadership](notes/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC/Professional%20Review%20MOC/2.%20Management%20and%20Leadership.md)

This Attribute is subdivided into 8 parts if you are aiming for Chartered Engineer level.

## Overview
###### *a) Maintain and extend knowledge of engineering theory and practice, and how technology assists it's application*
Attribute 1 requires a professional engineer to ==maintain and extend knowledge of==:
- engineering theory and practice
- how technology assists its application

The maintenance and extension of this knowledge is demonstrated through the completion of your CPD. Technology and developments in the industry move quickly - therefore it is important to stay in touch with new changes.

It is important to ==know the theory, but more so, know how this is used in your current work==. You cannot forget the important core engineering principles which underpin everything we do.

###### *b) solve engineering problems using a sound theoretical approach, based on evidence, and contribute to continuous improvement*
This attribute is deliberately broad and allows a lot of opportunity for flexibility in demonstrating it. Continuous improvement in this case can be demonstrated by showing how you improved a process or problem, perhaps in it's speed, accuracy or quality.

###### *c) engage in the creation and/or introduction of new, advancing or improved techniques and technology*
Techniques and technology can be interchanged in this case. ==Candidates will have to show where they have either created or introduced a new way of doing something which benefits the process==; perhaps the new use of technology in an area which had not previously had it's application.

###### *d) identify, review and select techniques, procedures and methods to undertake engineering tasks*
This should be an everyday occurrence for candidates; virtually every activity within engineering would have an identification and risk management procedure. The main challenge with this comes in part (e) and the extension to this attribute.

###### *e) take an active role in the identification and definition of requirements, challenges, risks, and opportunities and undertake appropriate investigation and action*
Along with the previous attribute point, you should be able to show what ==identification and actions== were done when observing a task. This should probably be framed in the context of risk: are your actions increasing or decreasing risk, and what effect do they have on climate/cost/time. ==What were the alternatives, why did you select this solution?==.

###### *f) contribute to the design and development of engineering solutions, implement those solutions, and evaluate their effectiveness in the context of the whole project life cycle*
In reference to the [Project life-cycle](notes/Project%20life-cycle.md), you have to show consideration for the long-term effects of your engineering solution, from design → development → implementation → evaluation → operation → demolition / removal.

###### *g) undertake the design, development and implementation of engineering solutions and evaluate their effectiveness in the context of the whole project life cycle*
A good section from the "Successful Professional Reviews" book which encapsulates these attributes is:

*"Engineers who designed something need to explain ==how it was built and how it will be maintained==. Those who construct something need to explain how it was designed and so on. How many tower cranes were needed? What load did they impose? How were the piles installed; what size piling rig was needed? ==These things shouldn’t be assumed to be none of your business.== There is also an overlap with the commercial Attribute, as often there are financial judgements to make, such as a trade-off between capital expenditure now against future operational expenditure."*

*"The additional obligation for CPR candidates in part 1(g) is to undertake these actions, not merely contribute to them. This provides a different challenge; where the candidate can show that these things were done, this possibly sits neatly with the obligation in part 1(h) to exercise sound independent engineering judgement. ==When designing a bridge with a design life of 120 years, how can you do this if you don’t know what traffic will look like in say 50 years’ time?=="*

###### *h) exercise sound independent engineering judgement*
Using the above as reference, any judgements considering the [Project life-cycle](notes/Project%20life-cycle.md), evaluating risk, cost and time, should:
- be sound
- be independent
- be about engineering
- be exercised
Though it is not always easy to show independence in a decision, there must be a level of it away from the rest of your team.

## Attribute Points

> A) Maintain and extend knowledge of engineering theory and practice, and how technology assists its application
> 
> B) Solve engineering problems using a sound theoretical approach, based on evidence, and contribute to continuous improvement
> 
> C) Engage in the creation and/or introduction of new, advancing or improved techniques and technology
> 
> D) Identify, review and select techniques, procedures and methods to undertake engineering tasks
> 
> E) Take an active role in the identification and definition of requirements, challenges, risks, and opportunities and undertake appropriate investigation and action
> 
> F) Contribute to the design and development of engineering solutions, implement those solutions, and evaluate their effectiveness in the context of the whole project life cycle
> 
> G) Undertake the design, development and implementation of engineering solutions and evaluate their effectiveness in the context of the whole project life cycle
> 
> H) Exercise sound independent engineering judgement


## Advice
For IEng level you need to satisfy A), B), D), F), and H), while for CEng level you need to satisfy all eight. But what is the difference between them?

The A) and B) are about getting your knowledge up to the current industry best practices, while C) and D) are about taking it further. Of course as a CEng applicant you will need to know what the current best practices are before you attempt anything new. Similar to how you would perform a literature review in an academic thesis in the first chapter.

There is not an expectation to create something totally new, but more appropriately a small amendment in how things were previously done which brings improvement for the industry or the society. For instance:

-   Did you amend a concrete pouring sequence to save 2% of total concrete volume, or speed up the process by 3%?
-   Did you manage to automate via a computer script a boring but important engineering job to save time for everyone and free up resources?
-   Did you do a bit of research behind a building design code and notice some leeway to deviate under certain situations?

If you studied for a Masters or Doctorate degree then satisfying this Attribute should be fairly straightforward, as the requirements to pass those degrees are in line with what is required here.

Remember you need to show capability to do the above, so think broadly, even if your evidences are not so relevant to your daily work. For instance, you can demonstrate your eagerness to learn through attending all sorts of courses and conferences, and for CEng – applying this newly gained knowledge in your role. You may have helped a friend to design an extension to his house and had to do background research. (Though this last example on its own probably would not get you through a review.)

Just remember the main things to you will need to demonstrate in your portfolio and review are:

-   Curiosity and self-initiative
-   Ability to learn by yourself
-   Why your new, and old, knowledge is beneficial to engineering
-   How you are able to introduce your new idea/technique into industry. (Or at least a good understanding of where the difficulties may lie in the process and what you could potentially do about them)

## Question Checklist
*These points are taken from the IEng and CEng attributes videos found on the [ICE website](https://www.ice.org.uk/careers-learning/develop-your-career/membership-guidance/incorporated-and-chartered-professional-review/).

- [ ] Show I have engineering technical knowledge and understanding  
- [ ] Know theory and 1st principles  
- [ ] Best practices, standards, and codes and rules/ideas 
- [ ] Able to make technical decisions and solve technical problems in my particular discipline  
- [ ] Able to use relevant technology and apply the right methods to solve the engineering problem  
- [ ] Contribute to the improvement of methods and solutions  
- [ ] What is my engineering knowledge and how have I used it to solve engineering problems on my project? 
- [ ] Have I identified alternative/recommended solutions/preferred options - what did I do? 
- [ ] Have I constructed solutions or designed solutions? 
- [ ] How have I analysed engineering solutions or suggested changes? 
- [ ] Can I explain methods use to analyse/model/select/check/construct? 
- [ ] Understand the principles behind any commonly used practices or standard solutions.
- [ ] Can I explain my knowledge and understanding or relevant standards and codes? 
- [ ] Can I describe how I currently follow best practices? 
- [ ] Do I understand and can I explain the fundamental theories I’m my discipline?  
- [ ] Calculations, modelling, analysis, how things behave, describe loadings conditions, bending moments, forces, deflection, moment, movement, what engineering principles are used in my engineering model/ calculations/ analysis.  
- [ ] Can I explain the fundamental of the materials I used/selected : properties, how I make the choices for the materials etc 
- [ ] Know the failure mechanisms, composition and material details of [Concrete](notes/Concrete.md), [Steel](notes/Steel.md) and [Timber](notes/Timber.md)
- [ ] Know the principles of [Geotechnics](notes/Geotechnics.md), including material properties, failure mechanisms, analysis options and lab testing
- [ ] What did I need to know to plan and interpret results from [Ground Investigation](notes/Ground%20Investigation.md)
- [ ] Understand the Load Paths and failure mechanisms of any structure you have worked on. For structural engineers, these should include:
	- [ ] [Bored Piles](notes/Bored%20Piles.md)
	- [ ] [Vehicle Restraint Systems](notes/Vehicle%20Restraint%20Systems.md)
	- [ ] [Sheet Piling](notes/Sheet%20Piling.md)
- [ ] Evidence of continuous improvement
- [ ] (CEng) Loading/managing the role in determining the solution and methodologies used to come to that solution s
- [ ] (CEng) Solving non-standard problems
- [ ]   Mention of MEICA – Mechanical, Electrical, Instrumentation, Control, Automation








Navigation: [Homepage](_index.md), [Civil Engineering MOC](notes/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC.md), [Areas MOC](Areas%20MOC)
