---
title: "2. Management and Leadership"
tags: 
- Management and Leadership
- Attribute
---
*Taken from [The Civil Engineering Exam](https://thecivilengineeringexam.com/example-ice-written-exercise-submission/)*
# 2. Management and Leadership

👉 Next: [3. Commercial Ability](notes/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC/Professional%20Review%20MOC/3.%20Commercial%20Ability.md)
👈 Previous: [1. Understanding and Practical Application of Engineering](notes/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC/Professional%20Review%20MOC/1.%20Understanding%20and%20Practical%20Application%20of%20Engineering.md)

What does this mean exactly? If you read the text carefully from the first attribute, you will notice that half of the sub-attributes relate to whether you are driving the industry forward with your engineering research or application. A similar concept applies to this Attribute but in the context of management processes.

Some can overthink this attribute, and there is likely a way you have satisfied it even if you haven't led large teams of people.

> Remember, you can *manage* your team around you, for example knowing who to go to when a service requires removal, without *leading* them. I would say the difference between leadership and management is that leadership is having a direct impact on the way a team operates, whether that be developing a new management system or delegating tasks to others. Management doesn't require necessarily the change in approach by others, rather; using their skill-sets to solve a task.

## Overview
###### *a) Plan the work and resources needed to enable effective implementation of engineering tasks and projects*
Most should be able to complete this: it does not have to be a huge task, but everyone should have evidence of how they planned a task and assigned resources to it.

###### *b) Manage the planning and organisation of tasks and resources*
As above, but requires the organisation of these items - how have you directly planned for the completion of this operation?

###### *c) And manage (organise, direct and control), programme or schedule, tasks and resources (CEng)*
For CEng, a greater sense of ownership and responsibility is required. This task should most likely have been the responsibility of the candidate - how did you absorb the information and requirements, determine the resources required to complete it and then schedule / plan this operation?

###### *d) Manage teams or technical specialisms*
There is no requirement for the size of the team - instead, being able to recognise a chain of command or operation and knowing who the go-to person is on the team for a certain operation is vital. Strengthening these relationships and knowing their specialities is all part of being a chartered engineer.


###### *e) And lead or influence teams/technical specialisms, understanding the limits of their skills and knowledge (CEng)*
How have you been able to use your own skills and specialisms to move the needle and help your team succeed? These do not have to be specific technical skills and can be more "soft skills".


###### *f) Assist others to meet changing technical and managerial needs*
This is all about adapting to your 


###### *g) And develop others to meet changing technical and managerial needs (CEng)*



###### *h) Manage quality processes and contribute to quality improvements*



###### *i) And demonstrate continuous quality improvement and promote best practice (CEng)*




## Attribute Points

> A) Plan the work and resources needed to enable effective implementation of engineering tasks and projects
> 
> B) Manage the planning and organisation of tasks and resources.
> 
> C) Manage (organise, direct and control), programme or schedule, tasks and resources
> 
> D) Manage teams or technical specialisms
> 
> E) Lead or influence teams / technical specialisms, understanding the limits of their skills and knowledge
> 
> F) Assist others to meet changing technical and managerial needs
> 
> G) Develop others to meet changing technical and managerial needs
> 
> H) Manage quality processes and contribute to quality improvements
> 
> I) Demonstrate continuous quality improvement and promote best practice

Parts A), B), D), F), and H) are a requirement for IEng whilst CEng requires all nine attributes to be satisfied. The difference being that CEng requires you to demonstrate you can lead by example and evaluate processes for continual improvement; whilst IEng is simply management of the status quo.

> Lessons Learnt – always a powerful tool of evaluation and continuous improvement [Source](https://pixabay.com/en/photos/checklist/)

The key to achieving this attribute is to avoid succumbing to complacency. If any process, no matter how small or big, goes well it is easy to pat each other's back and call it a job well done. But you should always record some form of after action review, whether formally or privately, and ask yourself the following questions:

-   What went well?
-   What went not so well?
-   Was it to programme?
-   Was it to budget?
-   Was it to satisfactory quality?
-   Was it sustainable?
-   What were the bottlenecks in the processes?
-   How did I manage any difficulties I came across?
-   Is it possible to get feedback from others I worked with?
-   What could I do differently next time with knowledge I gained from this experience?


On the topic of technical and managerial needs, you are required to show how you identified opportunities to improve your colleagues' abilities in new technologies or skills. For instance, you may have:

-   Delivered seminars on the latest revisions to design codes or regulations, e.g. CDM 2015 or EN/ISO design code revisions
-   Making adjustments to a document control or other registry tool and assisting staff with its implementation
-   Created a computer script to automate labour-intensive tasks and gotten people to use it.
-   Led H&S inspections and implementation on site
-   Identified commercial issues and developing a process to mitigate them  
    Influencing teams the benefits of BIM; tweaking existing processes to suit BIM and implementing training and workshops in relation to rollout of BIM

The good thing about this Attribute is that you should be able to show Chartership qualities in your working behaviour from day one, even if it takes some further time to collect your evidence. With the right mentality of always striving to improve everything, if you can keep demonstrating your application of learnings then you should be able to satisfy this attribute very quickly.

## Question Checklist

- [ ] Have I created project plans, project start up documents, work break down schedules, programmes, Gantt charts, manage the sequencing/inputs of others/activities/plant/labour? 
- [ ] What is the difference between a [Clause 31 Programme](notes/Clause%2031%20Programme.md) and [Clause 32 Programme](notes/Clause%2032%20Programme.md), and how does this relate to a [Contract](notes/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC/Commercial%20MOC/Contract.md).
- [ ] What is [Terminal Float](notes/Terminal%20Float.md), and who owns it?
- [ ] How have I considered deadlines/milestones? 
- [ ] How do I report progress?  
- [ ] What is Terminal float and who owns it? 
- [ ] Impact of my works on scheme (think bigger picture) 
- [ ] How have I dealt with change? 
- [ ] How have I developed myself or colleagues? 
- [ ] What have I done to ensure effective people/resource management? Or what have I done to manage a technical specialism? 
- [ ] What have I done to manage [Quality Assurance](notes/Quality%20Assurance.md)? 
- [ ] What is the difference between [Quality Assurance](notes/Quality%20Assurance.md) and [Quality Control](notes/Quality%20Control.md)?
- [ ] What are the Quality Management processes outlined in [ISO 9001 2015](notes/ISO%209001%202015.md)?
- [ ] What responsibilities are associated with ISO9001? 
- [ ] Have I been involved in an audit?  
- [ ] What we’re the outcomes and actions? 
- [ ] (CEng) Note and show that I am leading teams (can be small teams or specialism projects, or aspects of projects) 
- [ ] (CEng) Directing and controlling  
- [ ] (CEng) Difference between management and leadership, managing and leading (CEng level requires leading) 
	- [ ]   Developing staff, leading change, controlling change, learning from the past. What happens if there is a gap in myself or teams skill set ?(think CAT and agent training)  
	- [ ]   Must ensure they are trained or I can fill the gap with other team members 
	- [ ]   Do I influence team training/development, is the team adapting/evolving? How?  
- [ ]  (CEng) Learn from the past and ensure that I’m using best practices, and through the quality processes that I am making improvements









Navigation: [Homepage](_index.md), [Civil Engineering MOC](notes/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC/Civil%20Engineering%20MOC.md), [Areas MOC](Areas%20MOC)
